Hey guys.
Welcome to lecture 39.
And in this lecture,
we'll learn about binning.
As always, we'll import the usual.
Pandas as pd and, from pandas
we'll import series and DataFrame.
Okay, so
we'll learn about binning right now.
To start off with,
let's go ahead and make a list.
We'll just call it years and
I'm gonna just go 1990.
Let's see, 1990, 1991, 1992.
Let's skip ahead to 2008, 2012, 2015, and
then we'll go back so it's not in order.
1987, 1969, 2013, 2008, and 1999.
All right, so
now I have the random list of years, and
then I'm gonna make another
list called decade_bins.
So I'm gonna be using this list to
separate these years by decade.
And so for this list, it's gonna be pretty
simple, it's just gonna be 1960, 1970,
use all of the decades, 1980, 1990,
2000, 2010, and then 2020 whoops.
2020.
Okay, and I forgot to put
brackets to make it into a list.
So let me do that real quick.
All right.
Alt enter, perfect.
So, now we'll use cut to design something
that's called a category object.
So pandas has these category objects
that's gonna help us do this binning.
So I'm going to make an object
called decade_cat for
category, and
then I'm gonna call the cut method.
So I'll say pd.cut, and for
this method, I'm gonna pass in an X and
then my bins.
So what that X is, is the object that I
wanna cut into a certain amount of bins.
So, I want to cut my years
into different decade bins.
All right.
So now let's go ahead and
see what this decade_cat,
this decade category object looks like.
So if you notice here,
it counts off how many categories we have.
So we have six, 1960,
1970, then to 1970 to 1980,
1980 to 1990, 90 to 2000, etc.
And it's been able to cut
my years into certain bins,
depending on whether or
not that year is in the decade.
So I can check my categories
using decade_cat,
the category's name, and
I can call the method categories on it.
That's gonna tell me the index of
the categories, so basically each decade.
60 to 70, that's a decade, 70 to 80,
that's a decade, 80 to 90, etc.
All right.
So now the important part, I wanna check
the value counts in each category.
So I can say,
pd.value_count which we've seen before,
and i'm gonna pass that
category object into it.
So this is gonna count how many
years I have in each category, or
how many objects I have in each
category in a general case.
So in this case,
I have three years between 2010 and 2020.
I have one year between 1960 and 1970.
And then, there were zero
years between 1970 and 1980.
We can also pass data values to the cut.
So for instance, if I just wanted to make
two bins evenly spaced based on the max
and min year, I can do that.
So, to show you an example,
I can say pd.cut.
I just wanna say, go ahead and
cut up that year's list, and
then just cut it up into two bins.
And I'll state my precision to be
within plus or minus one year.
So let's go ahead and see what happens.
So now my years, there's only two bins,
they've been evenly cut.
So now the bins are between 1969 and
1992 or between 1992 all the way to 2015.
So all those years have been
separated into two bins, so
it's everything in the first bin
which is a time era of 69 to 92.
And then, it cut up the years into
a second bin from 1992 to 2015.
So that's about it for binning basics.
Just a quick note,
as far as the values of the bin itself.
The notation of, for instance right here,
I'm highlighting a parenthesis
versus a bracket.
So that notation is the exact
same thing as in math notation.
A parenthesis means open while using
the square brackets means it's closed, so
it in includes that number.
So for instance, this 2015 bracket,
that means it's including 2015,
and the parentheses means it's just open.
So next up, we'll learn about outliers and
scribing data.
Just an overview on binning,
what we learned.
You can use cut to bin an object
either by declaring your bin list or
by just saying how many
bins you wanna cut it into.
And then,
that creates a category object and
you can call categories, and
take value counts on that category.
And that's it for binning, just
separating your data into different bins.
They'll be useful for histograms in
the future and that sort of thing.
And I'll see you at the next lecture for
outliers and scribing data.
Okay.
I'll see you there.